- After their victory over
Germany in North Africa.
American generals want
to attack the Third Reich
directly through
Northern Europe.
but Prime Minister
Winston Churchill
and the British
believe an operation
of that size
and scope is premature.
Failure would be catastrophic.
Churchill proposes they
attack Germany from the south.
for what he considers the soft
underbelly of Europe.
Italy.
- All wars change the world.
but none of them
changed the world
like the Second World War did.
- Japan's on the march.
Germany's on the march.
No one can imagine the nightmare
they're about to unleash.
The most destructive
war in human history.
- Suddenly the world
is turned upside down
and all hell is let loose.
- The West is stunned by
the speed of the advance.
- You get the Allies
led by the big three.
Roosevelt. Churchill. Stalin.
Men who were dealing with
immensely complicated questions.
- It's the biggest military
operation of human history.
- The Allies have
to come together.
not just militarily.
but industrial scale.
It's a global perspective.
- They have to fight
in every climate.
from the Arctic to the
jungles of the Pacific.
to the deserts of Africa.
and the depths of the ocean.
But there was no
certainty of victory.
It was going to be a
horrific bloodbath.
- We see humans at
their absolute worst.
how they treat
other human beings.
and we see them at
their absolute best.
willing to give their lives
that others might live.
- World War II was a struggle
in which there could be one
victor and one vanquished.
Do you want subtitles for any video?
-=[ ai.OpenSubtitles.com ]=-
- In May. 1943.
the prime minister
of Great Britain
and the president of the United
States meet in Washington DC
for the third time since
American entry into the war.
Rarely in history
have political leaders
forged as personal a bond
as Winston Churchill
and Franklin Roosevelt.
- Churchill still feels
he's the senior partner.
He can get what he
wants out of Roosevelt.
- So after Tunis. after
the big victory in North Africa.
Churchill's argument is that
there's one logical next step.
and that next step is Sicily.
So campaigning in
the Mediterranean
will not only knock over one
of the three big Axis powers.
Mussolini's Italy.
it will also open a back
door to Hitler's Germany.
- And the American
commanders are saying. "Why?
Let's just go
straight for Berlin.
What are we doing?
Why are we dancing
around the edges here
with this Mediterranean
nonsense?"
And they think that
Franklin Roosevelt
is being persuaded by
Churchill's pretty words.
- There were charges
then and since
that Churchill wanted to go up
through the bottom of Europe
in order to preserve
the British Empire.
- Britain was a
Mediterranean power.
The Americans suspected
that this was all about
defending British interests
in Egypt. in the Suez Canal
that controlled India
and the Persian Gulf
where British oil was.
- FDR's
not interested
in preserving the
British Empire.
but he understands there
are sound. strategic reasons
to capture Sicily.
- One of Churchill's
arguments was.
they had these commitments
to take some pressure
off the Soviet Union.
Joseph Stalin has been
pushing for a second front.
Churchill says. "You
have all of these armies
that are now freed up
after the North African
campaign is over.
What are you gonna do with them?
They're right there."
- The truth is that the
Allies
still don't have
enough actual material
to conduct a cross-channel
invasion and land in France.
- Allied military leaders
are already planning a
cross-channel invasion.
Operation Overlord.
but it will not be
ready for months.
To relieve the military
pressure on the Soviets.
and sustain the
momentum established
by the victory in North Africa.
FDR agrees to attack Sicily.
- After Sicily. they
will pull. let us say.
the Allied A-team out
of the Mediterranean.
the leadership team. most
of the landing craft.
most of the air power.
deploy it to Great Britain
to begin. finally.
preparations in earnest
for an invasion
of Western Europe.
- Churchill's like.
"Yes. of course.
I'm sure things
will go really fast.
We'll be back in time for a
nice early D-Day in 1944."
He goes. "Look.
we're all dressed up.
we're ready to go to the ball.
Let's do Sicily."
- The invasion of
Sicily is given the code name
Operation Husky.
- At the time.
Operation Husky
is the biggest amphibious
operation in history.
The scale of shipping and
manpower is unprecedented.
They're gonna put
onshore. 160.000 troops.
- Both Italian and
German troops
oppose the Allied landings.
But the Allies achieve surprise.
and quickly secure the beaches.
- You've got two field
commanders on Sicily.
Montgomery for the British.
Montgomery is given the key
role. Patton for the Americans.
Patton's job is
really as a shield.
- The
British Eighth Army.
under general
Bernard Montgomery.
will advance north to Messina.
while the American Seventh Army.
under General George Patton.
guards his left flank.
- If you get to
Messina. any troops that are
on Sicily cannot cross back over
it into Italy proper.
And now you've captured all
the troops that are on Sicily
and you own Sicily.
- And that's especially
crucial
for the German
divisions.
so that the Allies
won't have to face them
at some future point
in some future battle.
- As in North Africa.
British and American forces
are required to
operate as one force.
- This is a really
ambitious attempt
to just bring two nations
with two different traditions
very. very close into harmony.
And as you might expect.
there's teething trouble.
- Montgomery and the
British senior commanders
all had a similar
attitude to the Americans.
which is. they're green.
There were disasters and
setbacks in North Africa.
they're still
learning their trade.
We've been at this since 1940.
Patton. on the other
hand. thinks Montgomery
has no kind of understanding
of what American servicemen
can actually achieve.
- Both armies
endure horrendous conditions.
The mountainous terrain.
the 100-plus degree heat.
thousands are felled by malaria.
- Sicily in the
summertime is incredibly hot.
it is disease ridden.
Fighting there is
brutal for everyone.
- Fire!
- Facing
stiff German resistance.
Montgomery's army stalls.
He's given access to the road
Patton's army has already taken.
- Patton goes
ballistic.
To his credit. Patton doesn't
just sit there seething.
He comes up with a plan.
- What Patton sees
is. a drive north up to Palermo
would put a feather in his cap.
- The Americans overrun
the western half of Sicily
before the Germans and Italians
know what is happening.
- Patton captures
the Sicilian capital of Palermo
less than two weeks after
the initial landings.
- This is the signal
moment for the US army
so far in World War II.
- Patton's forces are greeted
in the streets of Palermo
by Sicilians who were never a
hundred percent on board
with fascism anyway.
and they're gonna greet
the arriving American army
as liberators.
- Yet again.
Adolf Hitler must adjust
for Italian military weakness.
- His major ally on
the European continent.
Benito Mussolini. seems unable
even to defend his
own home territory.
- Benito Mussolini
and his Italian fascist movement
had set the stage
for Adolf Hitler
and the rise of the
Nazi party in Germany.
- Mussolini is the
inventor of fascism.
is the embodiment of the
virility of the fascist man.
In the early phases
of this relationship.
Hitler himself looks up at
Mussolini. and he aspires to do
what Mussolini has been
able to achieve in Italy.
- Hitler
consciously copied
Mussolini's grab for power.
- Duce! Duce! Duce!
- The symbolism.
- Sieg heil.
- The
political tactics.
the violence.
But Mussolini no longer commands
an iron grip on his nation
like Hitler does.
- Mussolini's war has
brought Italy
nothing but
misery.
The Italian people
wanted very little part
of this war at the beginning.
they want no part of it now.
Things cannot go on like this.
- Hitler's getting
situation reports
of what's going on in Sicily.
basically saying the
Italians aren't fighting.
He makes the decision
to go to Italy
to put some spine
into Mussolini.
He is shocked by the
sight of Mussolini.
who's really a broken man after
the defeat in North Africa.
There isn't much
fight left in him.
and Hitler is horrified
by what he's seeing.
- Hitler harangues
Mussolini
for hours about his
failures.
His failure to instill
a war-like spirit
into the armed forces.
his failure to make true
fascists of the Italian people.
his failure to prosecute the
war with sufficient vigor.
and Mussolini has no choice
but to sit there and take it.
- As Hitler
and Mussolini meet.
the Allies begin a
bombing campaign on Rome.
- The news comes as
a shock to Mussolini.
and he tries to convey to Hitler
the gravity of the situation.
Hitler continues as if
nothing had happened.
- The bombing of Rome
adds fuel
to this already simmering fire
of questioning and doubt
about Mussolini's leadership.
- The bombing of
Rome is a shock to the Italians.
The battles have been
fought elsewhere.
but now the price of
Mussolini's war hits home.
- There's grumbling
in the streets.
Mussolini thinks
he has the fascist
brand counsel in his pocket.
he thinks he has the
top leadership
in the military in his pocket.
he thinks he has the
King in his pocket.
- Victor Emmanuel III
has been
the King of Italy since
1900.
and he's the one that
handed the government
over to Mussolini in 1922.
- On July 25th. the
day after the fascist council
passes a vote of no
confidence for Mussolini.
the King summons
him to his palace.
- And he's told not
to wear his uniform.
This should have been
an indication to him
that trouble was afoot.
and his wife. in fact.
advises him not to go.
Mussolini tells her. "No
problem. I've got this."
- But the King
has Mussolini arrested.
He's rushed away in the
back of an ambulance
to hide him from public view.
- His 21-year fascist
reign is over.
- The fall of Mussolini
leads to a very confusing
situation.
The new head of state is the
marshal of the Italian army.
Pietro Badoglio.
He actually makes
an announcement
that the war goes on.
"We remain Germany's
loyal ally."
- After
Mussolini is deposed.
FDR addresses the nation.
- My fellow Americans.
our terms to Italy
are still the same.
unconditional surrender.
- Publicly. Badoglio
states repeatedly
that the war effort is going
on alongside the Germans.
Privately. he is actually
starting to make arrangements
for the Italians to
get out of the war.
- Badoglio signals
that Italy might be open
to an armistice.
He sends one of his generals
to secretly negotiate
directly with the Allies.
- Badoglio might
wish to surrender.
but he needs to have
someone at his back.
He knows that there
will be retribution
from the angriest man
in Europe at the time.
and that will be Adolf Hitler.
- In Sicily. Patton's
army leaves Palermo
to get to Messina.
while the British are
advancing from the south.
Meanwhile. the Germans
are taking advantage
of the delay in
getting to Messina
to begin getting off the island.
It's effectively
the German Dunkirk.
because pretty much
everyone who could walk
and was able-bodied. got off.
and not only that. they got
off with all their equipment.
- The entire purpose of
the Allied operational plan
was to trap the Germans
on Sicily. and they fail.
- Still. things in
Sicily
go pretty much as
Churchill would've wished.
Not only do Allied
troops successfully
drive Axis forces
outta of Sicily.
and it also proves
to be the death nail
of Mussolini's fascist regime.
- With
the potential deal
for an Italian
surrender in the works.
FDR and Churchill
meet in Quebec.
- And it's at this point
that Churchill is able
to say to Roosevelt.
"Look. the Italians are
pulling out of the war.
We have an opportunity
bloodlessly take
the Italian peninsula.
You know. what's not to like
in this operation?"
- Churchill says. "The
Italians are begging us
to come and help liberate
them and switch sides.
We could be in Rome in
a couple of weeks here.
If we land in Italy.
it'll be a cakewalk.
We can't do Sicily
and then go home."
- FDR agrees.
but only with assurance
that Operation Overlord
will remain the Allies'
highest priority.
- The difficult trade off
in the Italian campaign
is that the key resources.
the landing craft
and the best troops.
are gonna go back to the
UK to prepare for D-Day.
- Supreme Allied
Commander Dwight Eisenhower
now picks one of America's
youngest generals
to lead the Italian invasion.
Mark Clark. commander
of the US Fifth Army.
- Clark has a flare
for showmanship.
Because once you pin on a star.
you're also becoming a little
bit of a politician as well.
- Mark Clark has an
immense amount of talent.
but he also has a
corresponding ego.
He travels with a press corps.
He will only let them take
pictures of his favorite side.
which I think is his left side.
based on all the
pictures we see of him.
- The Allied
strategy in Italy
calls for two large forces.
The first will land
in and Calabria.
and the second will land a
few days later at Salerno.
The two forces will then link.
and push north towards Rome.
At Calabria.
Montgomery's Eighth Army
lands almost uncontested
- Badoglio was supposed
to take to the airwaves
on the evening of September 8th
and announce the
Italian surrender.
and this is crucial to the plan.
because it will tell the
hundreds of thousands
of Italian troops how in
beach defense positions
not to fire at the
Allies as they land.
- At
his headquarters.
Eisenhower waits by his radio.
The Salerno landings
are just hours away.
- 6:30 comes. no
Badoglio.
Seven o'clock. no Badoglio.
The entire plan hinges
on a well announced.
orderly Italian surrender.
- Eisenhower
decides to force the issue
by going on the radio himself.
- The Italian government
has surrendered its armed
forces unconditionally.
All Italians who now
act to help eject
the German aggressor
from Italian soil
will have the assistance
and the support of
the United Nations.
- Hitler
anticipates the announcement
of the armistice.
- From the moment
Mussolini falls.
Hitler's convinced that
Badoglio's government
is going to withdraw
from the war.
- For weeks.
Hitler has been moving
German troops into Italy.
He orders Operation Axis.
- The Germans have an
operation
they've been
preparing.
which is that. if the
Italians do the dirty on us.
we're gonna disarm them
and we're gonna take over
the security of all of Italy.
- Italy will
become an occupied nation.
- Operation Axis is the
disarmament of the Italian army
and the occupation of
the entire Italian Boot
by German forces.
It occurs with
lightning rapidity.
The Italian army is
on its back foot.
They aren't so sure about
who they should be firing at.
if anyone.
- Local Italian
resistance movements
form and fight the Germans.
Nazi retaliation is fierce.
- The Italians were
being executed by the Germans
after they switched sides.
There were a lot of
terrible things going on.
villages wiped out.
- When the
Allied invasion force
lands at Salerno.
they believe they'll be
welcomed by Italian troops.
- Underlying this
operational plan is intelligence
that the German army
may evacuate Italy.
that it has no desire
to defend Italy.
If all goes well. the
Allies should be up to Rome
with almost no
casualties at all.
- So what they're gonna
do is they're gonna land
without any pre-bombardment.
and they're gonna hope
for tactical surprise.
- The Allies are
expecting to meet
happy Italian
faces.
perhaps handshakes. taking
over Italian positions
now that Italy had surrendered.
and instead. what the troops
at Salerno experienced
was a wall of German fire.
- The whole of the beach
is being saturated with
shellfire.
It's an absolute inferno.
It was a grim experience for
those first few crucial days
in which they're trying
to defend the beachhead.
And it's the fighting at Salerno
that really convinces Hitler
to make them fight for
every inch of Italy.
- Hitler moves
more forces to defend Italy.
He also discovers that Mussolini
is being held at a hotel
in the Apennine Mountains.
and decides to take action.
- Hitler just can't
quit Mussolini. apparently.
He orders a commando
raid onto the Gran Sasso
to rescue Benito Mussolini.
That force lands.
overcomes Mussolini's guards.
- Mussolini
is flown back to Germany.
- Hitler thinks that
Mussolini
would give legitimacy to the
German occupation of Italy.
- For the rest of the
war. Mussolini will be ruling
a kind of puppet regime
in northern Italy.
But he's a shadow of the figure
who used to strut across the
world stage in the 1930s.
The situation has
changed drastically
since Mussolini was the top
dog and Hitler the imitator.
to now. Mussolini
as Hitler's lap dog.
- After a massive
air and naval assault.
Clark's Fifth Army breaks out
of Salerno and moves inland.
- A modern mechanized
army is going to experience
great difficulty
in driving north.
because the Germans recognized.
the terrain's gonna do
half the work for us.
- Mountain ranges.
ravines. and fast flowing rivers
made Italy a sort
of natural fortress.
- What the Germans
do effectively
is scorched earth policy.
They rip up the railway tracks.
they flood the river valleys.
They make it almost impossible
to move through this terrain
unless you've taken
the high ground.
It was very clear very quickly
that they were gonna struggle
to fight their way up
the Italian peninsula.
General Mark Clark relabeled
Churchill's description of
Italy as the soft underbelly
as the tough old gut.
- It is said
that all roads lead to Rome.
but in the fall of 1943.
for the Allies.
there was only one.
Highway 6.
- As Allied forces are
lured deeper and deeper
by moving north up Highway 6.
the German strategy
very quickly becomes.
we're going to set up a
series of defensive lines.
and you come to us. and
we will then maul you.
- It looked a lot like
World War I defenses look.
There are mines. and
mortars. and machine guns.
On the high ground. you
have artillery observers.
who could have a full view
of the advance of the Allies.
and they would call artillery
to fire on the advances.
The frustration grows with the
costliness of this advance.
the slowness of this
advance up the Boot.
- There's some
historical wisdom here.
and it traces back to the
great Napoleon who once said.
"Italy is a boot.
and like all boots.
has to be entered from the top."
where there's a
nice broad plain.
plenty of room to maneuver.
- To fight up from
the toe of Italy
after coming from Sicily...
Look at the terrain of Italy.
Big mountain range all
down the center spine.
This is the big
problem in Italy.
Who would wanna put an
army into that area.
especially if it's raining?
- It rains every day.
And General Clark once said.
"Anyone who ever talks
about sunny Italy
should be here in October."
which is when the
Allies were there.
Gains are measured not in
miles. but often in yards.
The Italian campaign soon turns
into a slog for the Allies.
- And it's sapping
their energy.
They're wet. they're
cold. they're tired.
All of that is draining
morale. as well as manpower.
One of the things
that they resort to
is using mules to
carry supplies forward.
'cause at least mules can get
through that kind of terrain
in those kind of conditions.
- I think it's fair to
say. when the war began.
in the war department
in Washington.
no one was thinking of mules.
- It was arguably the
most horrendous fighting
that the Western Allies
had to experience
in the whole of the
European theater.
There's no question that
some of the Americans
who've given the go ahead
for the Italian campaign
are now having second thoughts.
- Churchill and the
British commanders
promised the Americans
that. basically.
Italy would fall
relatively quickly.
- Churchill argues
again and again
that it would be
folly not to continue
once one has set out on
the Italian campaign.
arguing they must
capitalize on their gains.
- What do you do.
evacuate Italy?
No. you fight the
enemy in front of you.
Before you know it. you're
embroiled in a massive. costly.
brutal war in Italy.
- Highway 6
snakes into the Liri Valley
on its way up the
Italian peninsula.
Overlooking the valley is
a 1.700-foot rocky peak
called Monte Cassino.
Perched on top is a sixth
century Benedictine abbey.
Monte Cassino is
the strong point
of the German's
defensive formation.
the Gustav Line.
- It must have seemed to
the Allies.
as they gazed up
there.
that this is a kind of
perfect defensive position
for the Germans to use.
- From the commanding
heights of this terrain.
the Germans can rain down
accurate and effective
artillery fire at all times.
- There is no way
to get to Rome
without in some way
dealing with Monte Cassino.
- The Allies hope
to get to Rome by Christmas.
but it's here in the
shadow of Monte Cassino
that the advance stalls.
In November. Allied
leaders gather in Tehran.
FDR is meeting Stalin
for the first time.
- And the first thing
that happens
is Roosevelt and
Stalin
seem insistent on building
their own relationship.
sometimes freezing
Churchill out.
and he takes this
really badly.
- He has to cede center
stage with Roosevelt to Stalin.
And Churchill is in an
interesting kind of
no man's land.
- There's this old line
that Stalin didn't know much
English. but he knew two words.
second front.
because he said it over
and over and over again.
And when Stalin
says second front.
he doesn't mean Sicily
or even mainland Italy.
he means France.
- Churchill says. "I was
the little British donkey
sitting between the
great American eagle
and the Soviet bear.
and I was the only one
who knew the way home."
- Churchill is still
sticking
with his Mediterranean
plan.
But he knows that.
coming out of Tehran.
it's really important
to be able to go back
and win this victory.
- Winston Churchill.
the master of
out-of-the box
thinking.
has an idea for a left hook.
an amphibious landing on
the western shore of Italy
behind the Gustav Line.
- Troops
will land at Anzio.
50 miles behind the
German forces.
then drive inland.
drawing German defenders
away from Monte Cassino.
- Winston Churchill
thinks
that this could break
the whole thing free.
This is the wildcat we need
to shatter this stalemate.
- The Allies
agree to do it.
mainly because Churchill
is convinced it can work.
- But because so many
men and landing craft
have been shipped back to
Britain to prepare for D-Day.
the an Anzio landing winds
up being two divisions only.
a drop in the bucket.
- The Allied force at
Anzio lands on an empty beach.
There are almost no
Germans in front of it.
Surprise has been achieved.
- Speed is
of the essence.
As soon as you land. you
must get off the beachhead
as quickly as possible.
strike inland.
One jeep patrol
actually gets as far
as the outskirts of Rome.
So clearly. there is a
route of advance open.
- The
commander of the invasion
is General John Lucas.
- Instead of driving
boldly into the interior
and seizing the high ground
over the Anzio beachhead.
General Lucas stays put.
- His thought is. "I
need to secure this port.
'cause that is how we
will be reinforced".
and so he sits.
As he sits. the German
commander Kesselring
will basically pull
all the cooks. bakers.
and candlestick
makers from round Rome
and build them up to pen
in the Anzio landing.
- The Germans have
the high ground again.
and are able to
control the situation
by subjecting the Allied
forces to constant shelling.
- Leading the way in
the German bombardments
were two enormous railroad guns.
known colloquially to the Allies
as Anzio Annie and
the Anzio Express.
These fire a 500-pound
shell 30 miles.
- It would've sounded
like a freight train.
You could hear it kinda
whistling in. and then boom.
- The Allies at Anzio
are sitting in a marsh.
They have no cover.
Around them are mountains
and German artillery.
and the artillery
never stops firing.
- There was nowhere on
the beachhead you could go to
and get respite
from enemy fire.
And so. what you
basically gotta do
is burrow down into the
ground and hold tight.
It was just this
horrendous grind
of being under fire
for 24 hours a day.
- This is as
miserable a position
as any force in World War II
found themselves.
- Anzio is
Churchill's plan.
And he said. famously.
after the event.
"I thought we landed a
wildcat on the shore.
What we got was a beach whale."
- The
Luftwaffe strafes
Allied troops on the beachhead.
Included in the effort to help
Lucas's forces off the beach
is the 99th Fighter Squadron.
part of what will become
known as the Tuskegee Airmen.
- During that era
of segregation.
most African Americans
serve in rear echelon units.
Tuskegee airmen are
frontline fighting units.
and they're changing
everyone's minds.
On one of their mission.
16 of them fly over Anzio.
and then what they find
is the German aircraft
working over the landing craft.
They shoot down 10 of
those German aircraft.
- To the south.
multiple attacks on the
Monte Cassino abbey fail.
The Allies debate
whether to bomb
the mountaintop
Abbey from the air.
- The Benedictine
abbey that sits on Monte Cassino
is a cultural relic.
The law of armed conflict would
say. we don't touch those.
- Of course. this is one
of the most important libraries
of Christian thought
for millennia.
and many civilians had
taken refuge there.
- But the assumption
was that the Germans
were inside the
abbey and using it
as the perfect field
artillery observer's position.
We cannot allow the enemy
to continue to harass
us with artillery fire.
So. the abbey's gotta go.
Allied forces
distributed pamphlets
warning that there
would be a bombardment.
and the residents. they thought.
they're not actually
going to do it.
- Allied bombers flatten
this shrine of Christianity.
The bombing actually
resulted in the killing
of hundreds of civilians who
were taking refuge there.
- Allied
intelligence was wrong.
The German observation posts
had not been inside
the monastery walls.
- The Germans who weren't
occupying the abbey
have now decided to
occupy the rubble.
which is incredibly effective
for defensive purposes.
So the Allies got
the exact opposite
of what they hoped to achieve.
- Bombing the monastery
gets the Allies
no closer to their goal.
At some point. infantry
is going to have to
ascend a mountain
under enemy fire.
- The Allies have
bombed the Monte Cassino abbey.
but the Germans still
hold the summit.
When the weather
improves in May.
the Allies make yet
another assault.
- They take nearly
their entire force in Italy
and cram it into the narrow
western half of the peninsula.
using overwhelming strength now.
tanks. aircraft. ceaseless
waves of artillery bombardment.
- You've got this extraordinary
United Nations of troops.
I mean. people from all
over the world are Cassino.
- We got the
British. we got the Americans.
we got New Zealand Maoris. we
got Canadians. we got Indians.
we got French
Moroccans. Goumiers.
that are wonderful
mountain fighters.
It is one of the places where
Japanese Americans fight.
Who gets assigned Monte
Cassino? The Pols.
- World War II
began in Europe
when Germany invaded Poland.
As much as anyone.
the Polish people
have suffered from the
brutal rule of the Nazis.
- The idea that
Pols
would never miss an
opportunity
to take it back
out on the Germans
for what they did to them
should be lost on no one.
- At Monte Cassino.
the Pols are that
final wave of fighters.
and they. with incredible
bravery and toughness.
go up this
huge inclines.
- As you advance up the
hill. you have to show yourself.
You're gonna be picked
off. you're a sitting duck.
- We're talking
almost 4.000 casualties
for the Polish units attacking
against Monte Cassino.
- The Pols
finally overrun the
ruins of the abbey.
- The Polish flag is
unveiled
on the top of the
monastery.
And they play this very.
very famous bugle call.
HejnaB Mariacki.
which translates to St.
Mary's trumpet call.
It's a symbol of resilience.
of national identity.
of hope for the future.
and of the fight for Poland
for every single Polish person.
And it sounds out
over the monastery
once the fighting has died down.
- The
Gustav Line is broken.
The Americans are finally able
to break out of the
Anzio beachhead.
- There's a plan to
encircle
and destroy the
Germans.
- The plan is for Mark
Clark
to angle his troops
to the northeast
and cut off Highway
6 at Valmontone.
Those were the
orders he was given.
- But Clark decides to
make a swift left turn.
that is north. towards Rome.
- Rome is an
irresistible target.
Nothing screams we
are making progress
than to have captured Rome.
And Mark Clark fundamentally
thinks that the Fifth Army.
who has slogged their way
up the Italian peninsula.
and him in particular.
should get credit for this.
- The conquest of
Rome is to take out
one of the great
Axis capitals
in the war.
And what you're doing
is pointing out to
the rest of the world
that we're on the
march. it's happening.
and next stop. Berlin.
- The first of the Axis
capitals is now in our hands.
One up
and two
to go.
- However. the
liberation of Rome
is gonna be entirely
overshadowed
because the next day is going
to be the launch of D-Day.
and Roosevelt can't
say anything about it.
- After 10 months.
the Allies have reached
the Italian capital.
But General Clark's
decision to take Rome
allows the Germans
to escape once again.
- Ever since. he's had
to answer questions
about those orders.
Was his ego simply too
large to pass up Rome?
- Ultimately.
the liberation of Rome
has more symbolic
than strategic value.
The Allies would continue to
fight the Germans in Italy
for almost another year.
- I think Churchill
went to his grave thinking
there was an opportunity
there that was missed.
Churchill always believed
that it had been a good idea.
but it had been undone
by a bit of foot dragging
and some bad luck.
- The Italian
campaign is the moment
at which Churchill
overreaches himself.
He had insisted on this
vast continental campaign
that had led to
nothing but misery.
- Because
of difficult terrain.
military miscalculation.
and determined resistance
from a skillful enemy.
the Allied effort in Italy
gained little and cost much.
- The Italian campaign
is the last time
the British will have
a predominant presence
in the Allied forces.
America has been building
airplanes and tanks.
and creating soldiers.
As the American strength rises.
Winston Churchill's
influence wanes.
- The battle for Italy.
which will go on until
the end of the war.
was fought with
determination and bravery.
Ordinary soldiers
fought for their nation.
but also for each other.
This kind of comradery is found
in all theaters and
on all battlefields.
War tests the best of us.
And nowhere would
men be tested more
than in the skies over Germany.
Support us and become VIP member
to remove all ads from www.OpenSubtitles.org